---
layout: post
title:  "LeetCode 295. Find Median from Data Stream"
date:   2016-01-22 22:33:00
categories: LeetCode
tags: [LeetCode, Data Structure]
---

### 求数据流的平均值

>Median is the middle value in an ordered integer list. If the size of the list is even, there is no middle value. So the median is the mean of the two middle value.
>
>Examples: 
>`[2,3,4]` , the median is `3`
>
>`[2,3]`, the median is `(2 + 3) / 2 = 2.5`
>
>Design a data structure that supports the following two operations:
>
> * void addNum(int num) - Add a integer number from the data stream to the data structure. >   
> * double findMedian() - Return the median of all elements so far.
>
>For example:    
>
>       add(1)    
>       add(2)    
>       findMedian() -> 1.5    
>       add(3)    
>       findMedian() -> 2    
>


这个问题的关键在于如何在O(1)时间内获取中位数。 

基本的思路是用两个堆，最大堆和最小堆，在插入数据时分别维持两个堆，需要获取中位数时根据两个堆的堆顶元素就可以得到。

使用Java的优先级队列PriorityQueue可以简洁地实现这个功能。

{% highlight Java %}

class MedianFinder {

    public PriorityQueue<Integer> maxPQ = new PriorityQueue(1000, Collections.reverseOrder());
    public PriorityQueue<Integer> minPQ = new PriorityQueue();
    

    // Adds a number into the data structure.
    public void addNum(int num) {
        this.maxPQ.offer(num);
        this.minPQ.offer(this.maxPQ.poll());
        if(this.minPQ.size() > this.maxPQ.size()){
            this.maxPQ.offer(this.minPQ.poll());
        }
        
    }

    // Returns the median of current data stream
    public double findMedian() {
        if((this.minPQ.size() + this.maxPQ.size()) % 2 == 0){
            return ((double)this.maxPQ.peek() + (double)this.minPQ.peek()) / 2;
        }
        else{
            return this.maxPQ.peek();
        }
    }
};

// Your MedianFinder object will be instantiated and called as such:
// MedianFinder mf = new MedianFinder();
// mf.addNum(1);
// mf.findMedian();

{% endhighlight %}
